README.md, before:

# Search and Sample Return Project

Dear reviewer,
This is the best I could do with the project in the time available. This was by far the largest Python project I had to work on (not much experience with Python). I am also working 4 days a week and in the mornings I am preparing for the drivers exam.
If any aspect of the project is insufficiently implemented please let me know. I will address it as soon as I have time.

## Generating video with the Jupiter Notebook
I have managed to run all the function is the notebook. `process_image()` was completed using the functions in the notebook.


[image1]: ./calibration_images/example_rock1.jpg 
[image2]: ./misc/Output_video_from_sample_images.jpg
[image3]: ./misc/Simulator_settings.jpg


The only method modified is `color_thresh()`. It now takes in RGB ranges.
```
def color_thresh(img, rgb_thresh):
    # Create an array of zeros same xy size as img, but single channel
    color_select = np.zeros_like(img[:,:,0])
    # Require that each pixel be above all three threshold values in RGB
    # whitin_thresh will now contain a boolean array with "True"
    # where threshold was met
    whitin_thresh = ( img[:, :, 0] >  rgb_thresh[0][0]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 0] <= rgb_thresh[0][1]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 1] >  rgb_thresh[1][0]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 1] <= rgb_thresh[1][1]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 2] >  rgb_thresh[2][0]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 2] <= rgb_thresh[2][1])
    # Index the array of zeros with the boolean array and set to 1
    color_select[whitin_thresh] = 1
    # Return the binary image
    return color_select
```
The color ranges where chosen using MS Paint-s color sampling tool and the provided calibration image.

![alt text][image1]


```
rgb_thresh_navigable = ([160, 255], [160, 255], [160, 255])
rgb_thresh_obstacle = ([0, 160], [0, 160], [0, 160])
rgb_thresh_rock = ([132, 157], [109, 177], [0, 55])
```

Optional functionality was added for debugging that marks the position of the rover on the world map with a white line.

```
 if mark_rover_position:
        data.worldmap[y_pos,
                      x_pos,
                      :] = 255
```

![alt text][image2]

The 60 fps video generated from images that I captures can be seen bellow:

[![Watch the video](https://raw.github.com/GabLeRoux/WebMole/master/ressources/WebMole_Youtube_Video.png)](https://youtu.be/q8aG1x4ttaM)


## Autonomous Navigation and Mapping
* The code was edited using the PyCharm IDE to be able to benefit from code folding and region definition. The code is synced to a Git repository [PocsGeza/Udacity_Rover_Challenge](https://github.com/PocsGeza/Udacity_Rover_Challenge).
* The simulator settings where: Resolution 1280x800, Graphics quality "Fantastic" 

 
![alt text][image3] 

## Perception Step
The `perception_step()` is similar to `process_image()` from the Jupiter Notebook.
### 1) Define source and destination points for perspective transform

```
source = np.float32([[14, 140], [301, 140], [200, 96], [118, 96]])
    destination = np.float32([[image.shape[1] / 2 - dst_size, image.shape[0] - bottom_offset],
                              [image.shape[1] / 2 + dst_size, image.shape[0] - bottom_offset],
                              [image.shape[1] / 2 + dst_size, image.shape[0] - 2 * dst_size - bottom_offset],
                              [image.shape[1] / 2 - dst_size, image.shape[0] - 2 * dst_size - bottom_offset],
                              ])
```
### 2) Apply perspective transform to the image
```
warped = perspect_transform(image, source, destination)
```
### 3) Apply color threshold to identify navigable terrain/obstacles/rock samples
```
rgb_thresh_navigable = ([160, 255], [160, 255], [160, 255])
rgb_thresh_obstacle = ([0, 160], [0, 160], [0, 160])
rgb_thresh_rock = ([132, 157], [109, 177], [0, 55])

threshed_navigable = color_thresh(warped, rgb_thresh_navigable)
threshed_obstacle = color_thresh(warped, rgb_thresh_obstacle)
threshed_rock = color_thresh(warped, rgb_thresh_rock)
```
### 4) Update Rover.vision_image
```
Rover.vision_image[:, :, 0] = threshed_obstacle*255
Rover.vision_image[:, :, 1] = threshed_rock*255
Rover.vision_image[:, :, 2] = threshed_navigable*255
```
### 5) Convert map image pixel values to rover-centric coordinates
```
xpix_rc_nav, ypix_rn_nav = rover_coords(threshed_navigable)
xpix_rc_obs, ypix_rn_obs = rover_coords(threshed_obstacle)
xpix_rc_rock, ypix_rn_rock = rover_coords(threshed_rock)
```
### 6) Convert rover-centric pixel values to world coordinates
#### a) Rotate navigable, obstacles and rock threshold images
 
  ```
    yaw = Rover.yaw

    xpix_rotated_nav, ypix_rotated_nav = rotate_pix(xpix_rc_nav,
                                                    ypix_rn_nav,
                                                    yaw)
    xpix_rotated_obs, ypix_rotated_obs = rotate_pix(xpix_rc_obs,
                                                    ypix_rn_obs,
                                                    yaw)
    xpix_rotated_rock, ypix_rotated_rock = rotate_pix(xpix_rc_rock,
                                                      ypix_rn_rock,
                                                      yaw)
```                                                  

 
#### b) Scale and translate to world coordinates
 
 ```
    scale = 10
    x_pos = Rover.pos[0]
    y_pos = Rover.pos[1]
    xpix_world_cord_nav, ypix_world_cord_nav = \
        translate_pix(xpix_rotated_nav,
                      ypix_rotated_nav,
                      x_pos,
                      y_pos,
                      scale)

    xpix_world_cord_obs, ypix_world_cord_obs = \
        translate_pix(xpix_rotated_obs,
                      ypix_rotated_obs,
                      x_pos,
                      y_pos,
                      scale)

    xpix_world_cord_rock, ypix_world_cord_rock = \
        translate_pix(xpix_rotated_rock,
                      ypix_rotated_rock,
                      x_pos, y_pos,
                      scale)
 ```
 
#### c) Trim distant points from nav and obs
 This was in the hope of improving fidelity
 
```
  Select points closer than given distance
    good_proximity = 15
    close_enough_nav = ((xpix_world_cord_nav - x_pos) ** 2 + (ypix_world_cord_nav - y_pos) ** 2) ** 0.5 < good_proximity
    xpix_w_cor_nav_trim = xpix_world_cord_nav[close_enough_nav]
    ypix_w_cor_nav_trim = ypix_world_cord_nav[close_enough_nav]

    close_enough_obs = ((xpix_world_cord_obs - x_pos) ** 2 + (ypix_world_cord_obs - y_pos) ** 2) ** 0.5 < good_proximity-5
    xpix_w_cor_obs_trim = xpix_world_cord_obs[close_enough_obs]
    ypix_w_cor_obs_trim = ypix_world_cord_obs[close_enough_obs]
```
### 7) Update Rover worldmap (to be displayed on right side of screen)
 #### a) Update world map
 Filtering was added based pitch and roll avoid updating the world map when the perspective transform would produce incorrect mappings.
 I did not want to take time to figure what scenario is causing the IndexError exception.
 
 ``` 
    pitch_range = [1, 359]
    roll_range = [1, 359]

    try:
        if  ((Rover.pitch < pitch_range[1]) | (Rover.pitch > pitch_range[0])) &\
        ((Rover.roll > roll_range[0]) | (Rover.roll > roll_range[0])):

            Rover.worldmap[ypix_w_cor_obs_trim.astype(np.int32), xpix_w_cor_obs_trim.astype(np.int32), 0] += 1
            Rover.worldmap[ypix_world_cord_rock.astype(np.int32), xpix_world_cord_rock.astype(np.int32), 1] += 1
            Rover.worldmap[ypix_w_cor_nav_trim.astype(np.int32), xpix_w_cor_nav_trim.astype(np.int32), 2] += 1
    except IndexError:
        pass
```
#### b) Trim worldmap
  Low sum points on the world map where periodically reset to 0 in hope of increasing the fidelity of the mapping.
  
  ```sh
    Rover.counter += 1
    if Rover.counter == 400:
        to_low_nav = Rover.worldmap[:, :, 2] < 20
        Rover.worldmap[to_low_nav[1], to_low_nav[0], 2] = 0

        to_low_obs = Rover.worldmap[:, :, 0] < 20
        Rover.worldmap[to_low_obs[1], to_low_obs[0], 0] = 0
        Rover.counter = 0
```
### 8) Convert rover-centric pixel positions to polar coordinates

```
 dist_nav, angles_nav = to_polar_coords(xpix_rc_nav, ypix_rn_nav)
 Rover.nav_dists = dist_nav
 Rover.nav_angles = angles_nav
```

## Decision Step

* I declared variables fine tuning the `decision()`.
* `enough_space_on_both_sides` is used to indicate the there is enough navigable terrain on the front left and front right side of the rover. This avoids getting to close to walls.
* `left_turn_bias` is added to invocations of Rover.steer and turns the rover into a wall crawler.

```
left_nav_ind = Rover.nav_angles[Rover.nav_angles > 0]

right_nav_ind = Rover.nav_angles[Rover.nav_angles <= 0]

enough_space_on_both_sides = (len(left_nav_ind) >= Rover.stop_forward/2) & (len(right_nav_ind) >= Rover.stop_forward/2)
                    
left_turn_bias = 11
```

## Possibilities for further improvements
* Not use distant points in decisions related to steering
* Filter reg channel for points that are high in the blue channel
* Implement sample pickup
* Implement the decision step with a finite state machine
* Extract RoverState to separate .py file
* Add type assertions to all methods
* Create RoverStateUndated class form RoverState and only do changes to the child class
* Store Home coordinates in RoverStateUndated
* Store color thresholds in RoverStateUndated
* Add Going_Home state to the rover after all rocks are collected or a given time has passed

Commit message:

demo video created + to readme

README.md, after:

# Search and Sample Return Project

Dear reviewer,
This is the best I could do with the project in the time available. This was by far the largest Python project I had to work on (not much experience with Python). I am also working 4 days a week and in the mornings I am preparing for the drivers exam.
If any aspect of the project is insufficiently implemented please let me know. I will address it as soon as I have time.

## Generating video with the Jupiter Notebook
I have managed to run all the function is the notebook. `process_image()` was completed using the functions in the notebook.


[image1]: ./calibration_images/example_rock1.jpg 
[image2]: ./misc/Output_video_from_sample_images.jpg
[image3]: ./misc/Simulator_settings.jpg


The only method modified is `color_thresh()`. It now takes in RGB ranges.
```
def color_thresh(img, rgb_thresh):
    # Create an array of zeros same xy size as img, but single channel
    color_select = np.zeros_like(img[:,:,0])
    # Require that each pixel be above all three threshold values in RGB
    # whitin_thresh will now contain a boolean array with "True"
    # where threshold was met
    whitin_thresh = ( img[:, :, 0] >  rgb_thresh[0][0]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 0] <= rgb_thresh[0][1]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 1] >  rgb_thresh[1][0]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 1] <= rgb_thresh[1][1]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 2] >  rgb_thresh[2][0]) \
                   & (img[:, :, 2] <= rgb_thresh[2][1])
    # Index the array of zeros with the boolean array and set to 1
    color_select[whitin_thresh] = 1
    # Return the binary image
    return color_select
```
The color ranges where chosen using MS Paint-s color sampling tool and the provided calibration image.

![alt text][image1]


```
rgb_thresh_navigable = ([160, 255], [160, 255], [160, 255])
rgb_thresh_obstacle = ([0, 160], [0, 160], [0, 160])
rgb_thresh_rock = ([132, 157], [109, 177], [0, 55])
```

Optional functionality was added for debugging that marks the position of the rover on the world map with a white line.

```
 if mark_rover_position:
        data.worldmap[y_pos,
                      x_pos,
                      :] = 255
```

![alt text][image2]

The 60 fps video generated from images that I captures can be seen bellow:

[![Watch the video](https://raw.github.com/GabLeRoux/WebMole/master/ressources/WebMole_Youtube_Video.png)](https://youtu.be/q8aG1x4ttaM)


## Autonomous Navigation and Mapping
* The code was edited using the PyCharm IDE to be able to benefit from code folding and region definition. The code is synced to a Git repository [PocsGeza/Udacity_Rover_Challenge](https://github.com/PocsGeza/Udacity_Rover_Challenge).
* The simulator settings where: Resolution 1280x800, Graphics quality "Fantastic" 

 
![alt text][image3] 

## Perception Step
The `perception_step()` is similar to `process_image()` from the Jupiter Notebook.
### 1) Define source and destination points for perspective transform

```
source = np.float32([[14, 140], [301, 140], [200, 96], [118, 96]])
    destination = np.float32([[image.shape[1] / 2 - dst_size, image.shape[0] - bottom_offset],
                              [image.shape[1] / 2 + dst_size, image.shape[0] - bottom_offset],
                              [image.shape[1] / 2 + dst_size, image.shape[0] - 2 * dst_size - bottom_offset],
                              [image.shape[1] / 2 - dst_size, image.shape[0] - 2 * dst_size - bottom_offset],
                              ])
```
### 2) Apply perspective transform to the image
```
warped = perspect_transform(image, source, destination)
```
### 3) Apply color threshold to identify navigable terrain/obstacles/rock samples
```
rgb_thresh_navigable = ([160, 255], [160, 255], [160, 255])
rgb_thresh_obstacle = ([0, 160], [0, 160], [0, 160])
rgb_thresh_rock = ([132, 157], [109, 177], [0, 55])

threshed_navigable = color_thresh(warped, rgb_thresh_navigable)
threshed_obstacle = color_thresh(warped, rgb_thresh_obstacle)
threshed_rock = color_thresh(warped, rgb_thresh_rock)
```
### 4) Update Rover.vision_image
```
Rover.vision_image[:, :, 0] = threshed_obstacle*255
Rover.vision_image[:, :, 1] = threshed_rock*255
Rover.vision_image[:, :, 2] = threshed_navigable*255
```
### 5) Convert map image pixel values to rover-centric coordinates
```
xpix_rc_nav, ypix_rn_nav = rover_coords(threshed_navigable)
xpix_rc_obs, ypix_rn_obs = rover_coords(threshed_obstacle)
xpix_rc_rock, ypix_rn_rock = rover_coords(threshed_rock)
```
### 6) Convert rover-centric pixel values to world coordinates
#### a) Rotate navigable, obstacles and rock threshold images
 
  ```
    yaw = Rover.yaw

    xpix_rotated_nav, ypix_rotated_nav = rotate_pix(xpix_rc_nav,
                                                    ypix_rn_nav,
                                                    yaw)
    xpix_rotated_obs, ypix_rotated_obs = rotate_pix(xpix_rc_obs,
                                                    ypix_rn_obs,
                                                    yaw)
    xpix_rotated_rock, ypix_rotated_rock = rotate_pix(xpix_rc_rock,
                                                      ypix_rn_rock,
                                                      yaw)
```                                                  

 
#### b) Scale and translate to world coordinates
 
 ```
    scale = 10
    x_pos = Rover.pos[0]
    y_pos = Rover.pos[1]
    xpix_world_cord_nav, ypix_world_cord_nav = \
        translate_pix(xpix_rotated_nav,
                      ypix_rotated_nav,
                      x_pos,
                      y_pos,
                      scale)

    xpix_world_cord_obs, ypix_world_cord_obs = \
        translate_pix(xpix_rotated_obs,
                      ypix_rotated_obs,
                      x_pos,
                      y_pos,
                      scale)

    xpix_world_cord_rock, ypix_world_cord_rock = \
        translate_pix(xpix_rotated_rock,
                      ypix_rotated_rock,
                      x_pos, y_pos,
                      scale)
 ```
 
#### c) Trim distant points from nav and obs
 This was in the hope of improving fidelity
 
```
  Select points closer than given distance
    good_proximity = 15
    close_enough_nav = ((xpix_world_cord_nav - x_pos) ** 2 + (ypix_world_cord_nav - y_pos) ** 2) ** 0.5 < good_proximity
    xpix_w_cor_nav_trim = xpix_world_cord_nav[close_enough_nav]
    ypix_w_cor_nav_trim = ypix_world_cord_nav[close_enough_nav]

    close_enough_obs = ((xpix_world_cord_obs - x_pos) ** 2 + (ypix_world_cord_obs - y_pos) ** 2) ** 0.5 < good_proximity-5
    xpix_w_cor_obs_trim = xpix_world_cord_obs[close_enough_obs]
    ypix_w_cor_obs_trim = ypix_world_cord_obs[close_enough_obs]
```
### 7) Update Rover worldmap (to be displayed on right side of screen)
 #### a) Update world map
 Filtering was added based pitch and roll avoid updating the world map when the perspective transform would produce incorrect mappings.
 I did not want to take time to figure what scenario is causing the IndexError exception.
 
 ``` 
    pitch_range = [1, 359]
    roll_range = [1, 359]

    try:
        if  ((Rover.pitch < pitch_range[1]) | (Rover.pitch > pitch_range[0])) &\
        ((Rover.roll > roll_range[0]) | (Rover.roll > roll_range[0])):

            Rover.worldmap[ypix_w_cor_obs_trim.astype(np.int32), xpix_w_cor_obs_trim.astype(np.int32), 0] += 1
            Rover.worldmap[ypix_world_cord_rock.astype(np.int32), xpix_world_cord_rock.astype(np.int32), 1] += 1
            Rover.worldmap[ypix_w_cor_nav_trim.astype(np.int32), xpix_w_cor_nav_trim.astype(np.int32), 2] += 1
    except IndexError:
        pass
```
#### b) Trim worldmap
  Low sum points on the world map where periodically reset to 0 in hope of increasing the fidelity of the mapping.
  
  ```sh
    Rover.counter += 1
    if Rover.counter == 400:
        to_low_nav = Rover.worldmap[:, :, 2] < 20
        Rover.worldmap[to_low_nav[1], to_low_nav[0], 2] = 0

        to_low_obs = Rover.worldmap[:, :, 0] < 20
        Rover.worldmap[to_low_obs[1], to_low_obs[0], 0] = 0
        Rover.counter = 0
```
### 8) Convert rover-centric pixel positions to polar coordinates

```
 dist_nav, angles_nav = to_polar_coords(xpix_rc_nav, ypix_rn_nav)
 Rover.nav_dists = dist_nav
 Rover.nav_angles = angles_nav
```

## Decision Step

* I declared variables fine tuning the `decision()`.
* `enough_space_on_both_sides` is used to indicate the there is enough navigable terrain on the front left and front right side of the rover. This avoids getting to close to walls.
* `left_turn_bias` is added to invocations of Rover.steer and turns the rover into a wall crawler.

```
left_nav_ind = Rover.nav_angles[Rover.nav_angles > 0]

right_nav_ind = Rover.nav_angles[Rover.nav_angles <= 0]

enough_space_on_both_sides = (len(left_nav_ind) >= Rover.stop_forward/2) & (len(right_nav_ind) >= Rover.stop_forward/2)
                    
left_turn_bias = 11
```
## How well does it navigate? 

The rover project accomplishes the minimum requirements of at least 40% mapped with at least 60% fidelity and one target identified on most autonomus runs. The bellow video illustrates the navigation.


[![Watch the video](https://raw.github.com/GabLeRoux/WebMole/master/ressources/WebMole_Youtube_Video.png)](https://youtu.be/dgBYnbwcYsE)

## Possibilities for further improvements
* Not use distant points in decisions related to steering
* Filter reg channel for points that are high in the blue channel
* Implement sample pickup
* Implement the decision step with a finite state machine
* Extract RoverState to separate .py file
* Add type assertions to all methods
* Create RoverStateUndated class form RoverState and only do changes to the child class
* Store Home coordinates in RoverStateUndated
* Store color thresholds in RoverStateUndated
* Add Going_Home state to the rover after all rocks are collected or a given time has passed
